[[ch11]]
== Sicherheit in Bitcoin

Das Sichern von Bitcoin ist eine Herausforderung, da Bitcoin kein abstrakter Verweis zu einem Wert ist, wie ein Guthaben auf einem Bankkonto. Bitcoin ist digitalem Bargeld oder Gold sehr ähnlich. Sie haben wahrscheinlich den Ausdruck "Besitz ist neun Zehntel des Gesetzes" gehört. Nun, bei Bitcoin macht der Besitz zehn Zehntel des Gesetzes aus. Der Besitz der Schlüssel zum Entsperren des Bitcoin entspricht dem Besitz von Bargeld oder einem Stück Edelmetall. Sie können es verlieren, verlegen, stehlen lassen oder versehentlich jemandem den falschen Betrag geben. In allen diesen Fällen haben Benutzer keinen Regressanspruch. Es ist als ob sie Bargeld auf einen öffentlichen Bürgersteig fallen lassen würden.

Allerdings hat Bitcoin Fähigkeiten, die Bargeld, Gold und Bankkonten nicht haben. Eine Bitcoin-Brieftasche, die Ihre Schlüssel enthält, kann wie jede Datei gesichert werden. Es kann in mehreren Kopien gespeichert werden, sogar auf Papier für ein Hard-Copy-Backup gedruckt werden. Sie können keine Backups von Ihrem Bargeld, Gold oder Bankkonten erstellen. Bitcoin ist so anders von allem Herkömmlichen, dass wir auch in neuartiger Weise an die Bitcoin Sicherheit denken müssen.

=== Sicherheitsprinzipien

((("security", "security principles", id="Sprinc11")))((("decentralized systems", "security of")))The core principle in bitcoin is decentralization and it has important implications for security. A centralized model, such as a traditional bank or payment network, depends on access control and vetting to keep bad actors out of the system. By comparison, a decentralized system like bitcoin pushes the responsibility and control to the users. Because security of the network is based on Proof-of-Work, not access control, the network can be open and no encryption is required for bitcoin traffic.

On a traditional payment network, such as a credit card system, the payment is open-ended because it contains the user's private identifier (the credit card number). After the initial charge, anyone with access to the identifier can "pull" funds and charge the owner again and again. Thus, the payment network has to be secured end-to-end with encryption and must ensure that no eavesdroppers or intermediaries can compromise the payment traffic, in transit or when it is stored (at rest). If a bad actor gains access to the system, he can compromise current transactions _and_ payment tokens that can be used to create new transactions. Worse, when customer data is compromised, the customers are exposed to identity theft and must take action to prevent fraudulent use of the compromised accounts.

Bitcoin ist dramatisch anders. Eine Bitcoin-Transaktion autorisiert nur einen bestimmten Wert für einen bestimmten Empfänger und kann nicht gefälscht oder geändert werden. Es gibt keine privaten Informationen, wie die Identitäten der Parteien, und es kann nicht dazu verwendet werden, um zusätzliche Zahlungen zu erstellen. Daher muss ein Bitcoin-Zahlungsnetzwerk nicht verschlüsselt oder vor Lauschangriffen geschützt werden. In der Tat können Sie Bitcoin-Transaktionen über einen  öffentlichen Kanal, wie ungesicherte WiFi oder Bluetooth, ohne Verlust der Sicherheit übertragen.

Bitcoin's decentralized security model puts a lot of power in the hands of the users. With that power comes responsibility for maintaining the secrecy of the keys. For most users that is not easy to do, especially on general-purpose computing devices such as internet-connected smartphones or laptops. Although bitcoin's decentralized model prevents the type of mass compromise seen with credit cards, many users are not able to adequately secure their keys and get hacked, one by one.


==== Entwickeln von sicheren Bitcoin Systemen

((("decentralized systems", "bitcoin as")))The most important principle for bitcoin developers is decentralization. Most developers will be familiar with centralized security models and might be tempted to apply these models to their bitcoin applications, with disastrous results.

Bitcoin's security relies on decentralized control over keys and on independent transaction validation by miners. If you want to leverage bitcoin's security, you need to ensure that you remain within the bitcoin security model. In simple terms: don't take control of keys away from users and don't take transactions off the blockchain.

Zum Beispiel konzentrierten viele frühe Bitcoin-Börsen alle Benutzer Guthaben in einer einzigen "heißen" Brieftasche, mit den Schlüsseln auf einem einzigen Server gespeichert. Ein solches Design entfernt die Kontrolle von den Benutzern und zentralisiert die Kontrolle über Schlüssel in einem einzigen System. Viele solche Systeme wurden gehackt, mit katastrophalen Folgen für ihre Kunden.

((("transactions", "off blockchain")))((("off-blockchain transactions")))Another common mistake is to take transactions "off blockchain" in a misguided effort to reduce transaction fees or accelerate transaction processing. An "off blockchain" system will record transactions on an internal, centralized ledger and only occasionally synchronize them to the bitcoin blockchain. This practice, again, substitutes decentralized bitcoin security with a proprietary and centralized approach. When transactions are off blockchain, improperly secured centralized ledgers can be falsified, diverting funds and depleting reserves, unnoticed.

Unless you are prepared to invest heavily in operational security, multiple layers of access control, and audits (as the traditional banks do) you should think very carefully before taking funds outside of bitcoin's decentralized security context. Even if you have the funds and discipline to implement a robust security model, such a design merely replicates the fragile model of traditional financial networks, plagued by identity theft, corruption, and embezzlement. To take advantage of bitcoin's unique decentralized security model, you have to avoid the temptation of centralized architectures that might feel familiar but ultimately subvert bitcoin's security.

==== Die Wurzel des Vertrauens

((("root of trust concept")))Traditional security architecture is based upon a concept called the _root of trust_, which is a trusted core used as the foundation for the security of the overall system or application. Security architecture is developed around the root of trust as a series of concentric circles, like layers in an onion, extending trust outward from the center. Each layer builds upon the more-trusted inner layer using access controls, digital signatures, encryption, and other security primitives. As software systems become more complex, they are more likely to contain bugs, which make them vulnerable to security compromise. As a result, the more complex a software system becomes, the harder it is to secure. The root of trust concept ensures that most of the trust is placed within the least complex part of the system, and therefore least vulnerable, parts of the system, while more complex software is layered around it. This security architecture is repeated at different scales, first establishing a root of trust within the hardware of a single system, then extending that root of trust through the operating system to higher-level system services, and finally across many servers layered in concentric circles of diminishing trust.

((("mining and consensus", "security and consensus")))Bitcoin security architecture is different. In bitcoin, the consensus system creates a trusted public ledger that is completely decentralized. A correctly validated blockchain uses the genesis block as the root of trust, building a chain of trust up to the current block. Bitcoin systems can and should use the blockchain as their root of trust. When designing a complex bitcoin application that consists of services on many different systems, you should carefully examine the security architecture in order to ascertain where trust is being placed. Ultimately, the only thing that should be explicitly trusted is a fully validated blockchain. If your application explicitly or implicitly vests trust in anything but the blockchain, that should be a source of concern because it introduces vulnerability. A good method to evaluate the security architecture of your application is to consider each individual component and evaluate a hypothetical scenario where that component is completely compromised and under the control of a malicious actor. Take each component of your application, in turn, and assess the impacts on the overall security if that component is compromised. If your application is no longer secure when components are compromised, that shows you have misplaced trust in those components. A bitcoin application without vulnerabilities should be vulnerable only to a compromise of the bitcoin consensus mechanism, meaning that its root of trust is based on the strongest part of the bitcoin security architecture.

The numerous examples of hacked bitcoin exchanges serve to underscore this point because their security architecture and design fails even under the most casual scrutiny. These centralized implementations had invested trust explicitly in numerous components outside the bitcoin blockchain, such as hot wallets, centralized ledger databases, vulnerable encryption keys, and similar schemes.((("", startref="Sprinc11")))


=== Benutzersicherheit, "Best Practices"

((("security", "user security best practices", id="Suser11")))((("use cases", "user security best practices", id="UCsecurity11")))Humans have used physical security controls for thousands of years. By comparison, our experience with digital security is less than 50 years old. Modern general-purpose operating systems are not very secure and not particularly suited to storing digital money. Our computers are constantly exposed to external threats via always-on internet connections. They run thousands of software components from hundreds of authors, often with unconstrained access to the user's files. A single piece of rogue software, among the many thousands installed on your computer, can compromise your keyboard and files, stealing any bitcoin stored in wallet applications. The level of computer maintenance required to keep a computer virus-free and trojan-free is beyond the skill level of all but a tiny minority of computer users.

Despite decades of research and advancements in information security, digital assets are still woefully vulnerable to a determined adversary. Even the most highly protected and restricted systems, in financial services companies, intelligence agencies, and defense contractors, are frequently breached. Bitcoin creates digital assets that have intrinsic value and can be stolen and diverted to new owners instantly and irrevocably. This creates a massive incentive for hackers. Until now, hackers had to convert identity information or account tokens—such as credit cards and bank accounts—into value after compromising them. Despite the difficulty of fencing and laundering financial information, we have seen ever-escalating thefts. Bitcoin escalates this problem because it doesn't need to be fenced or laundered; it is intrinsic value within a digital asset.

Glücklicherweise schafft Bitcoin auch die Anreize zur Verbesserung der Computersicherheit. Während zuvor das Risiko eines Computerkompromisses vage und indirekt war, macht Bitcoin diese Risiken klar und offensichtlich. Das Halten von Bitcoin auf einem Computer dient dazu, den Verstand des Benutzers auf die Notwendigkeit einer verbesserten Computersicherheit zu konzentrieren. Als direkte Folge der starken Vermehrung und der zunehmenden Annahme von Bitcoin und anderen digitalen Währungen haben wir eine Eskalation sowohl bei Hacking-Techniken als auch bei Sicherheitslösungen gesehen. In einfacher Hinsicht haben Hacker jetzt ein sehr saftiges Ziel und die Benutzer haben einen klaren Anreiz, sich zu verteidigen.

Over the past three years, as a direct result of bitcoin adoption, we have seen tremendous innovation in the realm of information security in the form of hardware encryption, key storage and hardware wallets, multisignature technology, and digital escrow. In the following sections we will examine various best practices for practical user security.

==== Physikalische Bitcoin Speicherung

((("storage", "physical bitcoin storage")))((("paper wallets")))((("wallets", "types of", "paper wallets")))((("paper wallets", see="also wallets")))Because most users are far more comfortable with physical security than information security, a very effective method for protecting bitcoin is to convert them into physical form. Bitcoin keys are nothing more than long numbers. This means that they can be stored in a physical form, such as printed on paper or etched on a metal coin. Securing the keys then becomes as simple as physically securing the printed copy of the bitcoin keys. A set of bitcoin keys that is printed on paper is called a "paper wallet," and there are many free tools that can be used to create them. I personally keep the vast majority of my bitcoin (99% or more) stored on paper wallets, encrypted with BIP-38, with multiple copies locked in safes. ((("cold storage")))((("storage", "cold storage")))Keeping bitcoin offline is called _cold storage_ and it is one of the most effective security techniques. A cold storage system is one where the keys are generated on an offline system (one never connected to the internet) and stored offline either on paper or on digital media, such as a USB memory stick.

==== Hardware Geldbörsen

((("wallets", "types of", "hardware wallets")))((("hardware wallets")))In the long term, bitcoin security increasingly will take the form of hardware tamper-proof wallets. Unlike a smartphone or desktop computer, a bitcoin hardware wallet has just one purpose: to hold bitcoin securely. Without general-purpose software to compromise and with limited interfaces, hardware wallets can deliver an almost foolproof level of security to nonexpert users. I expect to see hardware wallets become the predominant method of bitcoin storage. For an example of such a hardware wallet, see the https://trezor.io/[Trezor].

==== Risiken ausgleichen

((("risk, balancing and diversifying", seealso="security")))Although most users are rightly concerned about bitcoin theft, there is an even bigger risk. Data files get lost all the time. If they contain bitcoin, the loss is much more painful. In the effort to secure their bitcoin wallets, users must be very careful not to go too far and end up losing the bitcoin. In July 2011, a well-known bitcoin awareness and education project lost almost 7,000 bitcoin. In their effort to prevent theft, the owners had implemented a complex series of encrypted backups. In the end they accidentally lost the encryption keys, making the backups worthless and losing a fortune. Like hiding money by burying it in the desert, if you secure your bitcoin too well you might not be able to find it again.

==== Diversifizierung des Risikos

Would you carry your entire net worth in cash in your wallet? Most people would consider that reckless, yet bitcoin users often keep all their bitcoin in a single wallet. Instead, users should spread the risk among multiple and diverse bitcoin wallets. Prudent users will keep only a small fraction, perhaps less than 5%, of their bitcoin in an online or mobile wallet as "pocket change." The rest should be split between a few different storage mechanisms, such as a desktop wallet and offline (cold storage).

==== Multisig und Governance

((("multisig addresses")))((("addresses", "multisig addresses")))Whenever a company or individual stores large amounts of bitcoin, they should consider using a multisignature bitcoin address. Multisignature addresses secure funds by requiring more than one signature to make a payment. The signing keys should be stored in a number of different locations and under the control of different people. In a corporate environment, for example, the keys should be generated independently and held by several company executives, to ensure no single person can compromise the funds. Multisignature addresses can also offer redundancy, where a single person holds several keys that are stored in different locations.

==== Überlebensfähigkeit

((("survivability")))((("digital asset executors")))((("passwords", "survivability and")))((("security", "passwords")))One important security consideration that is often overlooked is availability, especially in the context of incapacity or death of the key holder. Bitcoin users are told to use complex passwords and keep their keys secure and private, not sharing them with anyone. Unfortunately, that practice makes it almost impossible for the user's family to recover any funds if the user is not available to unlock them. In most cases, in fact, the families of bitcoin users might be completely unaware of the existence of the bitcoin funds.

If you have a lot of bitcoin, you should consider sharing access details with a trusted relative or lawyer. A more complex survivability scheme can be set up with multi-signature access and estate planning through a lawyer specialized as a "digital asset executor."((("", startref="Suser11")))((("", startref="UCsecurity11")))

=== Schlussfolgerung

Bitcoin ist eine völlig neue, noch nie dagewesene und komplexe Technologie. Im Laufe der Zeit werden wir bessere Sicherheitswerkzeuge und -praktiken entwickeln, die von Nichtfachleuten einfacher zu verwenden sind. Derzeit können Bitcoin-Benutzer viele der hier beschriebenen Tipps verwenden, um ein sicheres und problemloses Bitcoin-Erlebnis zu genießen.