[preface]
== Glossario

Questo glossario comprende molti dei termini usati con riferimento al bitcoin. Si tratta di parole usate di frequente nel testo quindi si consiglia di memorizzarle per una rapida consultazione.

indirizzo::
    Un indirizzo bitcoin si presenta come +1DSrfJdB2AnWaFNgSbv3MZC2m74996JafV+. Consiste in una stringa di lettere e numeri. Fondamentalmente è un hash a 160-bit di un indirizzo pubblico in formato di codifica base58check. Esattamente come chiederesti ad altri di inviarti un email al tuo indirizzo email, potresti chiedere di mandarti bitcoin ad uno dei tuoi indirizzi bitcoin.

bip::
    Bitcoin Improvement Proposals (BIP). Un insieme di proposte che i membri della comunità bitcoin presentano per migliorare bitcoin. Per esempio, BIP-21 è una proposta per migliorare lo schema uniform resource identifier (URI).

bitcoin::
    Il nome dell'unità della valuta (la moneta), la rete ed il software.

blocco::
    Un gruppo di transazioni, segnate con un timestamp e l'impronta del blocco precedente. L'header del blocco è hashato per produrre un proof of work, validando in tal modo le transazioni. I blocchi validi sono aggiunti alla blockchain principale mediante il consenso della rete.

blockchain::
	Una lista di blocchi validati, ognuno dei quali è collegato al precedente arrivando fino al blocco di origine (genesis block).

Problema dei generali bizantini::
    Un sistema di computer affidabile dovrebbe riuscire a far fronte al fallimento di uno o più componenti propri. Un componente difettoso potrebbe mostrare un tipo di comportamento che viene spesso trascurato, cioè mandando informazioni contrastanti a parti differenti del sistema. Il problema di combattere questo tipo di scenario viene esemplificato nel problema dei generali bizantini.

coinbase::
	Un campo speciale utilizzato come unico input per la transazione coinbase. Il coinbase permette la rivendicazione della ricompensa del blocco e fornisce fino a 100 byte di dati arbitrari.
	Da non confondere con una transazione Coinbase.

transazione coinbase::
	È la prima transazione in un blocco, sempre creata da un minatore che include un singolo coinbase.
	Da non confondersi con Coinbase.

cold storage::
	Fa riferimento al mantenere una riserva di bitcoin offline. Il cold storage è tale quando le chiavi private bitcoin sono create e conservate in un ambiente sicuro offline. Il cold storage è importante per chiunque possieda dei bitcoin. I computer collegati online sono vulnerabili agli hacker e non dovrebbero essere utilizzati per immagazzinare un'ingente quantità di bitcoin.

conferme::
	Una volta che una transazione viene inclusa in un blocco, essa possiede una conferma. Non appena un _altro_ blocco viene minato sulla stessa blockchain, la transazione ha due conferme e così via. Sei o più conferme sono considerate sufficienti per provare che una transazione non può più essere revocata.

consenso::
    Quando più nodi, generalmente la maggior parte nella rete, hanno tutti gli stessi nodi nella loro più valida blockchain locale.
    Da non scambiare per le regole di consenso.

regole di consenso::
    Le regole di validazione del blocco che i nodi completi seguono per agire di consenso con gli altri nodi.
    Da non confondere con consenso.

difficoltà::
	Un'impostazione dell'intera rete che controlla quanto calcolo è richiesto per produrre una proof of work.

retargeting del livello di difficoltà::
	Un ricalcolo della rete riguardante la difficoltà che avviene una volta ogni 2016 blocchi e che considera la potenza di hashing dei 2016 blocchi precedenti.

livello di difficoltà::
    Una difficoltà con la quale tutti i calcoli della rete troveranno blocchi all'incirca ogni 10 minuti.

double-spending::
    Il double spending è il risultato di molteplici spese con lo stesso denaro. Bitcoin protegge contro il double-spending verificando ogni transazione aggiunta alla blockchain per assicurare che gli input non siano già stati spesi.

ECDSA::
    Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm o ECDSA è un algoritmo utilizzato da Bitcoin per assicurare che i fondi vengano spesi dai corrispettivi proprietari.

nonce extra::
    Man mano che la difficoltà aumenta, i minatori spesso provano tutti i 4 miliardi di valori del nonce senza trovare un blocco. Dato che lo script coinbase può archiviare tra i 2 ed i 100 byte di dati, i minatori utilizzano quello spazio come extra nonce, permettendo la ricerca in un intervallo più grande di valori di header per trovare blocchi validi.

commissioni::
	The sender of a transaction often includes a fee to the network for processing the requested transaction.  Most transactions require a minimum fee of 0.5 mBTC.

fork::
    Fork, also known as accidental fork, occurs when two or more blocks have the same block height, forking the block chain. Typically occurs when two or more miners find blocks at nearly the same time. Can also happen as part of an attack.

genesis block::
	The first block in the blockchain, used to initialize the cryptocurrency.

hard fork::
    Hard fork, also known as Hard-Forking Change, is a permanent divergence in the blockchain, commonly occurs when non-upgraded nodes can’t validate blocks created by upgraded nodes that follow newer consensus rules.
    Not to be confused with fork, soft fork, software fork or Git fork.

hardware wallet::
    A hardware wallet is a special type of bitcoin wallet which stores the user's private keys in a secure hardware device.

hash::
    A digital fingerprint of some binary input.

hashlocks::
    A hashlock is a type of encumbrance that restricts the spending of an output until a specified piece of data is publicly revealed. Hashlocks have the useful property that once any hashlock is opened publicly, any other hashlock secured using the same key can also be opened. This makes it possible to create multiple outputs that are all encumbered by the same hashlock and which all become spendable at the same time.

HD protocol::
    The Hierarchical Deterministic (HD) key creation and transfer protocol (BIP32), which allows creating child keys from parent keys in a hierarchy.

HD wallet::
    Wallets using the Hierarchical Deterministic (HD Protocol) key creation and transfer protocol (BIP32).

HD wallet seed::
    HD wallet seed or root seed is a potentially-short value used as a seed to generate the master private key and master chain code for an HD wallet.

HTLC::
    A Hashed TimeLock Contract or HTLC is a class of payments that use hashlocks and timelocks to require that the receiver of a payment either acknowledge receiving the payment prior to a deadline by generating cryptographic proof of payment or forfeit the ability to claim the payment, returning it to the payer.

KYC::
    Know your customer (KYC) is the process of a business, identifying and verifying the identity of its clients. The term is also used to refer to the bank regulation which governs these activities.

LevelDB::
    LevelDB is an open source on-disk key-value store. LevelDB is a light-weight, single-purpose library for persistence with bindings to many platforms.

Lightning Networks::
    Lightning Network is an implementation of Hashed Timelock Contracts (HTLCs) with bi-directional payment channels which allows payments to be securely routed across multiple peer-to-peer payment channels. This allows the formation of a network where any peer on the network can pay any other peer even if they don't directly have a channel open between each other.

Locktime::
    Locktime, or more technically nLockTime, is the part of a transaction which indicates the earliest time or earliest block when that transaction may be added to the block chain.

mempool::
    The bitcoin Mempool (memory pool) is a collection of all transaction data in a block that have been verified by bitcoin nodes, but are not yet confirmed.

merkle root::
    The root node of a merkle tree, a descendant of all the hashed pairs in the tree. Block headers must include a valid merkle root descended from all transactions in that block.

merkle tree::
    A tree constructed by hashing paired data (the leaves), then pairing and hashing the results until a single hash remains, the merkle root. In Bitcoin, the leaves are almost always transactions from a single block.

miner::
    A network node that finds valid proof of work for new blocks, by repeated hashing.

multisignature::
    Multisignature (multisig) refers to requiring more than one key to authorize a bitcoin transaction.

rete::
    A peer-to-peer network that propagates transactions and blocks to every bitcoin node on the network.

nonce::
    The "nonce" in a bitcoin block is a 32-bit (4-byte) field whose value is set so that the hash of the block will contain a run of leading zeros. The rest of the fields may not be changed, as they have a defined meaning.

off-chain transactions::
    An off-chain transaction is the movement of value outside of the block chain. While an on-chain transaction&#x2014;usually referred to as simply __a transaction__&#x2014;modifies the blockchain and depends on the blockchain to determine its validity an off-chain transaction relies on other methods to record and validate the transaction.

opcode::
    Operation codes from the Bitcoin Script language which push data or perform functions within a pubkey script or signature script.

Open Assets protocol::
    The Open Assets Protocol is a simple and powerful protocol built on top of the bitcoin blockchain. It allows issuance and transfer of user-created assets.

OP_RETURN::
    An opcode used in one of the outputs in an OP_RETURN transaction. Not to be confused with OP_RETURN transaction.

OP_RETURN transaction::
    A transaction type that adds arbitrary data to a provably unspendable pubkey script that full nodes don’t have to store in their UTXO database. Not to be confused with OP_RETURN opcode.

orphan block::
    Blocks whose parent block has not been processed by the local node, so they can’t be fully validated yet. Not to be confused with stale block.

orphan transactions::
    Transactions that can't go into the pool due to one or more missing input transactions.

output::
    Output, transaction output, or TxOut is an output in a transaction which contains two fields: a value field for transferring zero or more satoshis and a pubkey script for indicating what conditions must be fulfilled for those satoshis to be further spent.

P2PKH::
    Transactions that pay a bitcoin address contain P2PKH or Pay To PubKey Hash scripts. An output locked by a P2PKH script can be unlocked (spent) by presenting a public key and a digital signature created by the corresponding private key.

P2SH::
    P2SH or Pay-to-Script-Hash is a powerful new type of transaction that greatly simplifies the use of complex transaction scripts. With P2SH the complex script that details the conditions for spending the output (redeem script) is not presented in the locking script. Instead, only a hash of it is in the locking script.

P2SH address::
    P2SH addresses are Base58Check encodings of the 20-byte hash of a script, P2SH addresses use the version prefix "5", which results in Base58Check-encoded addresses that start with a "3". P2SH addresses hide all of the complexity, so that the person making a payment does not see the script.

P2WPKH::
    The signature of a P2WPKH (Pay-to-Witness-Public-Key-Hash) contains the same information as a P2PKH spending, but is located in the witness field instead of the scriptSig field. The scriptPubKey is also modified.

P2WSH::
    The difference between P2SH and P2WSH (Pay-to-Witness-Script-Hash) is about the cryptographic proof location change from the scriptSig field to the witness field and the scriptPubKey that is also modified.

paper wallet::
    In the most specific sense, a paper wallet is a document containing all of the data necessary to generate any number of Bitcoin private keys, forming a wallet of keys. However, people often use the term to mean any way of storing bitcoin offline as a physical document. This second definition also includes paper keys and redeemable codes.

payment channels::
    A micropayment channel or payment channel is class of techniques designed to allow users to make multiple bitcoin transactions without committing all of the transactions to the bitcoin blockchain. In a typical payment channel, only two transactions are added to the block chain but an unlimited or nearly unlimited number of payments can be made between the participants.

pooled mining::
    Pooled mining is a mining approach where multiple generating clients contribute to the generation of a block, and then split the block reward according the contributed processing power.

Proof-of-Stake::
    Proof-of-Stake (PoS) is a method by which a cryptocurrency blockchain network aims to achieve distributed consensus. Proof-of-Stake asks users to prove ownership of a certain amount of currency (their "stake" in the currency).

Proof-of-Work::
    A piece of data that requires significant computation to find. In bitcoin, miners must find a numeric solution to the SHA256 algorithm that meets a network-wide target, the difficulty target.

ricompensa::
    An amount included in each new block as a reward by the network to the miner who found the Proof-of-Work solution. It is currently 6.25 BTC per block.

RIPEMD-160::
    RIPEMD-160 is a 160-bit cryptographic hash function. RIPEMD-160 is a strengthened version of RIPEMD with a 160-bit hash result, and is expected to be secure for the next ten years or more.

satoshi::
    A satoshi is the smallest denomination of bitcoin that can be recorded on the blockchain. It is the equivalent of 0.00000001 bitcoin and is named after the creator of Bitcoin, Satoshi Nakamoto. ((("satoshi")))

Satoshi Nakamoto::
    Satoshi Nakamoto is the name used by the person or people who designed Bitcoin and created its original reference implementation, Bitcoin Core. As a part of the implementation, they also devised the first blockchain database. In the process they were the first to solve the double-spending problem for digital currency. Their real identity remains unknown.

Script::
    Bitcoin uses a scripting system for transactions. Forth-like, Script is simple, stack-based, and processed from left to right. It is purposefully not Turing-complete, with no loops.

ScriptPubKey (aka pubkey script)::
    ScriptPubKey or pubkey script, is a script included in outputs which sets the conditions that must be fulfilled for those satoshis to be spent. Data for fulfilling the conditions can be provided in a signature script.

ScriptSig (aka signature script)::
    ScriptSig or signature script, is the data generated by a spender which is almost always used as variables to satisfy a pubkey script.

chiave segreta (o chiave privata)::
	The secret number that unlocks bitcoin sent to the corresponding address.  pass:[<span class="keep-together">A secret</span>] key looks like the following:
+
----
5J76sF8L5jTtzE96r66Sf8cka9y44wdpJjMwCxR3tzLh3ibVPxh
----

Segregated Witness::
    Segregated Witness is an upgrade to the Bitcoin protocol in which signature ("witness") data is separated from sender/receiver data to further optimize the structure of transactions. Segregated Witness was implemented as a soft fork; a change that technically makes Bitcoin’s protocol rules more restrictive.

SHA::
    The Secure Hash Algorithm or SHA is a family of cryptographic hash functions published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).

Simplified Payment Verification (SPV)::
    SPV or simplified payment verification is a method for verifying that particular transactions were included in a block, without downloading the entire block. This method of verification is often used by lightweight Bitcoin clients.

soft fork::
    soft fork or Soft-Forking Change is a temporary fork in the blockchain which commonly occurs when miners using non-upgraded nodes don't follow a new consensus rule their nodes don’t know about.
    Not to be confused with fork, hard fork, software fork or Git fork.

stale block::
    Block that was successfully mined but that isn’t included on the current best block chain, likely because some other block at the same height had its chain extended first. Not to be confused with orphan block.

timelocks::
    A timelock is a type of encumbrance that restricts the spending of some bitcoin until a specified future time or block height. Timelocks feature prominently in many Bitcoin contracts, including payment channels and hashed timelock contracts.

transazione::
    In simple terms, a transfer of bitcoin from one address to another. More precisely, a transaction is a signed data structure expressing a transfer of value. Transactions are transmitted over the bitcoin network, collected by miners, and included into blocks, made permanent on the blockchain.

transaction pool::
    An unordered collection of transactions that are not in blocks in the main chain, but for which we have input transactions.

Turing completeness::
    A programming language is called "Turing complete" if it can run any program that a Turing machine can run, given enough time and memory.

unspent transaction output (UTXO)::
    UTXO is an unspent transaction output that can be spent as an input in a new transaction.

wallet::
    Software that holds all your bitcoin addresses and secret keys. Use it to send, receive, and store your bitcoin.

Wallet Import Format (WIF)::
    WIF or Wallet Import Format is a data interchange format designed to allow exporting and importing a single private key with a flag indicating whether or not it uses a compressed public key.

Some contributed definitions have been sourced under a CC-BY license from the https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Main_Page[bitcoin Wiki] or from other open source documentation sources.